Updated with transcript (#745)
nf-core/nf-co.re: markdown/events/2021/bytesize-8-nf-core-offline.md

* YouTube: <https://youtu.be/N1rRr4J0Lps>
* Slides: <https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.14413046.v1>

<details markdown="1"><summary>Video transcription</summary>
**Note: This transcript has been modified to make it reader-friendly**

[0:32](https://youtu.be/N1rRr4J0Lps?list=PL3xpfTVZLcNiSvvPWORbO32S1WDJqKp1e&t=32) Thank you, I will share my screen.

[0:40](https://youtu.be/N1rRr4J0Lps?list=PL3xpfTVZLcNiSvvPWORbO32S1WDJqKp1e&t=40) So hi, Maxime here. Today I’m going to talk to you about how to run a pipeline offline. I’m going to try to run two different pipelines.

[0:56](https://youtu.be/N1rRr4J0Lps?list=PL3xpfTVZLcNiSvvPWORbO32S1WDJqKp1e&t=56) So the plan is rather simple. First, we need to download the DSL1 pipeline, so we do that on `sarek`, the main container and an extra container because it’s `sarek`.

Then I’m going to download the DSL2 pipeline using `nf-core/tools` to get the container for all the modules, just in one command.

Then we need reference data, so I’m going to download AWS iGenomes.

> Then I will download NextFlow as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then I will download Nextflow as well.
```

Then I’m going to transfer all that to an offline machine and then run the pipeline.

I’ve done the downloading already, so I’m not doing it here. This is not a live demonstration.

[1:45](https://youtu.be/N1rRr4J0Lps?list=PL3xpfTVZLcNiSvvPWORbO32S1WDJqKp1e&t=105) So my set-up is loosely based on the system I am using.

In Sweden, we have this server, which is completely offline and we can send files to the server via a shared folder that we can connect to with `sftp`.

That’s what I will be doing now.

> [2:11](https://youtu.be/N1rRr4J0Lps?list=PL3xpfTVZLcNiSvvPWORbO32S1WDJqKp1e&t=132) So first on the machine that can actually with this offline machine (I am connecting to this machine) with the `ssh` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[2:11](https://youtu.be/N1rRr4J0Lps?list=PL3xpfTVZLcNiSvvPWORbO32S1WDJqKp1e&t=132) So first on the machine that can actually communicate with this offline machine (I am connecting to this machine) with the `ssh` command.
```

This slide shows how to download the `nf-core/rnaseq` pipeline.

We need to specify the release, which is 3.0.

I specify this with the `-s` flag that I want to download the Singularity image.

I have access to a very big machine.

I use `-p10`, which means that I will download 10 Singularity images at once (in parallel).

10 is a good number for an example although this machine would allow me to do more.

If you do that, you will see a progress bar, but this process takes a bit of time, so I’m not going to show that here.

[5:19](https://youtu.be/N1rRr4J0Lps?list=PL3xpfTVZLcNiSvvPWORbO32S1WDJqKp1e&t=319) I also use `--compress none` because I don’t want the final folder to be compressed because with that many containers (29 here), it will take a long time to compress them all.

Besides, I won’t really save much space.

I think it’s good to compress if you just have the script, but if you have you have dozens of containers, I don’t think it’s worth the effort.

[6:12](https://youtu.be/N1rRr4J0Lps?list=PL3xpfTVZLcNiSvvPWORbO32S1WDJqKp1e&t=372) Then let’s try and download the rest.

> So first I want to download NextFlow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So first I want to download Nextflow.
```

> If you look at the NextFlow release, you should have access to the NextFlow with the name of the release `-all`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you look at the Nextflow release, you have the Nextflow download URL with the name of the release, and then `-all`.
```

> If you don’t know this one directly, you don’t need internet access for NextFlow, which is very useful in our case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you don’t know this one directly, you don’t need internet access for Nextflow, which is very useful in our case.
```

> In my case, I have access to NextFlow through the cluster I work with, but in this current fictional case I don’t, so I’m going to download NextFlow myself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In my case, I have access to Nextflow through the cluster I work with, but in this current fictional case I don’t, so I’m going to download Nextflow myself.
```

We have two different versions because for `sarek`, I’m using the GATK bundle.

[7:50](https://youtu.be/N1rRr4J0Lps?list=PL3xpfTVZLcNiSvvPWORbO32S1WDJqKp1e&t=470) And then I connect to my offline server using `sftp`, and then the simple `sftp` command.

So I can use `-l -ls` to look at all the files I have in local, and then I use `put` to move the file from the local server to the distant server.

I move the whole folder using `put -r`.

That transfers all the files.

Then you need to connect to your offline server.

Now this is not strictly offline, but what I mean is that it’s a server with an open port and through which you can’t connect to anything else.

On this offline server, I move my file around. For example I put the Nextflow -all in bin, I make a symbolic link for that and I also put my pipeline in my own directory, so I know where they are.

But that’s more or less easy to do.

[9:26](https://youtu.be/N1rRr4J0Lps?list=PL3xpfTVZLcNiSvvPWORbO32S1WDJqKp1e&t=566) Then it’s fairly simple to run the pipeline.

So here I’m going to show what you can do if you don’t really use a profile.

> So I’m specifying the Singularity cache directory with `NXF_SINGULARITY_CACHEDIR`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So I’m specifying the Singularity cache directory with `$NXF_SINGULARITY_CACHEDIR`.
```

So you can do that, but I think it’s better if you specify the cache in the config file.

[10:27](https://youtu.be/N1rRr4J0Lps?list=PL3xpfTVZLcNiSvvPWORbO32S1WDJqKp1e&t=627) So the first example will be how to run the pipeline without specifying much in the profile, and the second example is running the rnaseq pipeline.

I suppose that everything has been specified in the offline profile.

[10:46](https://youtu.be/N1rRr4J0Lps?list=PL3xpfTVZLcNiSvvPWORbO32S1WDJqKp1e&t=646) That’s all actually.

So here are some tips.

> If you have a different set up, for example if you have access to a head node that is online and the others are offline, you can set up `NXF_SINGULARITY_CACHEDIR` to use a central cache for container downloads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have a different set up, for example if you have access to a head node that is online and the others are offline, you can set up `$NXF_SINGULARITY_CACHEDIR` to specify a central cache for container downloads.
```

Reviewer: Again tweaking for clarity

* YouTube: <https://youtu.be/N1rRr4J0Lps>
* Slides: <https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.14413046.v1>

<details markdown="1"><summary>Video transcription</summary>

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

So you can do that, but I think it’s better if you specify the cache in the config file.

[10:27](https://youtu.be/N1rRr4J0Lps?list=PL3xpfTVZLcNiSvvPWORbO32S1WDJqKp1e&t=627) So the first example will be how to run the pipeline without specifying much in the profile, and the second example is running the rnaseq pipeline.

I suppose that everything has been specified in the offline profile.

[10:46](https://youtu.be/N1rRr4J0Lps?list=PL3xpfTVZLcNiSvvPWORbO32S1WDJqKp1e&t=646) That’s all actually.

So here are some tips.

If you have a different set up, for example if you have access to a head node that is online and the others are offline, you can set up `NXF_SINGULARITY_CACHEDIR` to use a central cache for container downloads.

The latest version of nf-core/tools is quite smart, and won’t download the same container more than once.

Then use parallel for faster downloads, and `--compress none` because it’s much simpler not to compress big folders.

[12:05](https://youtu.be/N1rRr4J0Lps?list=PL3xpfTVZLcNiSvvPWORbO32S1WDJqKp1e&t=725) Apart from that, my main tips are read the docs, try things out, and don’t hesitate to ask questions.

> **Conversation after comment from Phil**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Conversation after comment from Phil**
```
